MSC4075: MatrixRTC notifications & call ringing (#4075)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4075-rtc-notification-event.md

Reviewer: @ara4n [said](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143#discussion_r1856299594):

> Something which is very unclear right now is the lifecycle of a call (and the draft of MSC4196 doesn't really help).
>
> Specifically, what has happened to `m.call.invite`? `m.call.answer`? `m.call.select_answer`? `m.call.hangup`? The intention of MSC3401 was to keep using these (as per https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/matthew/group-voip/proposals/3401-group-voip.md#basic-call) even when an SFU is involved, in order to preserve signalling for:
>
> * Call was placed but isn't ringing yet (not that we have in legacy VoIP)
> * Call is ringing
> * Caller gave up and stopped ringing
> * Call has been answered on a device
> * Call was rejected locally
> * Call was rejected on all devices
> * Call was answered
> * Call was hung up
>
> i.e. all the state machine transitions that go into the lifecycle of a call.
>
> I'm very worried that this seems to have been collapsed to a single `m.call.notify` event from MSC4075 + `m.rtc.member` events here, which seems to be missing most of the above. For instance, I can't see how the caller tells the callee that it's no longer ringing them - not to mention stuff like early media (MSC3635) or ringback tones.
>
> Legacy VoIP was already a dumbed down version of SIP, and I'm worried that the lack of signalling semantics here is going to make mimicing SIP or PSTN semantics really hard (let alone bridging to it), and would be a backwards step from legacy voip.

Reviewer: @fkwp and @ara4n had a chat about this out of band and agreed to consider this resolved. The RTC member event lifetime and the RTC notification event should cover the required lifecycle.

# MSC4075: MatrixRTC Notification Event (call ringing)

It is important that an RTC session initiated on clientA can make targeted clients ring.
This is of interest in 1:1 Rooms/Calls but also in bigger rooms ringing can be desired.

The existing "legacy" [1:1 VoIP calling in Matrix](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#voice-over-ip)
uses room events to negotiate the call.
A client can use the initial steps in the negotiation to also make the phone ring.

With [MSC4143: MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
this signalling is done over state events. Furthermore, [MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
allows for large group calls (not just 1:1) which makes it very

> desirable to have more configurations over the ringing process.

Reviewer: I think this may still refer to the initial version of MatrixRTC from before sticky events.

```suggestion
With [MSC4143: MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
this signalling is done over a mixture of state events and sticky
timeline events. Furthermore, [MatrixRTC](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4143)
allows for large group calls (not just 1:1) which makes it very
desirable to have more configurations over the ringing process.
```

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

## Proposal

A new event `m.rtc.notification` is proposed which can be sent by a client that
wants to notify others about the existence of a session for a MatrixRTC application.

> This event is added to the push rules for clients which

Reviewer: I think this has been made slightly more clear with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

support the application type so they receive push notifications. The push rules for intentional
mentions make sure no unnecessary push notification is sent.

This event contains the following fields by leveraging intentional mentions.

```json5
{
  "type":"m.rtc.notification", // org.matrix.msc4075.rtc.notification
  "content": {
    "sender_ts": 1752583130365,
    "lifetime": 30000,
    "m.mentions": {"user_ids": [], "room": true | false},
    "m.relates_to": {"rel_type":"m.reference", "event_id":"$rtc_member_event_id"},

>     "notification_type": "ring | notification",

Reviewer 2: Looks like the current implementation in js-sdk uses `m.call.intent`https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/4d0d32307eb4f1ce1fb65080fcca704f5bdedc31/src/matrixrtc/types.ts#L150

>     "notification_type": "ring | notification",

Reviewer 2: Also in this MSC it is never talking about calls, it is talking about rtc sessions. So maybe the naming is bad?
Maybe it should just be a `rtc_intent` that depends on the actual session beeing notified? like `voice_call` | `video_call` | `white_board_invite` ...

>     "notification_type": "ring | notification",

Reviewer: > Also in this MSC it is never talking about calls, it is talking about rtc sessions. So maybe the naming is bad? Maybe it should just be a `rtc_intent` that depends on the actual session beeing notified? like `voice_call` | `video_call` | `white_board_invite` ...

Yeah, `m.call.intent` doesn't fit well with the generic MatrixRTC design of this proposal. Maybe we could keep this information in the `application` objects in slots or member events?

>     "notification_type": "ring | notification",

Reviewer: Actually, it is part of #4196 already.

>     "notification_type": "ring | notification",

Reviewer: This is now part of the notification event after ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

  }
}
```

> The fields are defined as follows:

Reviewer: #4196 adds further application-specific fields. We should maybe explicitly state here that the fields can be extended based on the MatrixRTC app?

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

- `sender_ts` the local timestamp observed by the sender device. Is used in combination with lifetime to evaluate if
  the notification event is valid. To mitigate clients lying about the `sender_ts` this value has to be checked with `origin_server_ts`.
  Receivers **SHOULD** use `origin_server_ts` if `|sender_ts - origin_server_ts| > 20000 ms`.
- `lifetime` the relative time to the `sender_ts` for which the `ring` is active or to define the window in which the
  `notification` is not ignored. The recommended value is **30 seconds**.
  The receiving client **SHOULD** cap the lifetime to an upper bound. (recommended: **2 minutes**).

>   `lifetime` **MUST** be non-negative and SHOULD NOT exceed 120000 ms.

Reviewer: To avoid ambiguity, we could make the unit of time explicit here.

```suggestion
- `lifetime` the time in milliseconds relative to `sender_ts` for which the `ring` is active / the
  `notification` is not ignored. The recommended value is **30 seconds**.
  The receiving client **SHOULD** cap the lifetime to an upper bound. (recommended: **2 minutes**).
  `lifetime` **MUST** be non-negative and SHOULD NOT exceed 120000 ms.
```

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

- `m.mentions` optional:\
  Has the structure as defined for `m.mentions` in the [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#definition-mmentions).
- `notification_type` required string:\
  The type of notification to send.\
  `ring`: The client should ring.\

>   `notification`: The client should show a notification.\

Reviewer: The `notification` use case is slightly unclear to me – especially why it is combined with a lifetime.

For ringing, the lifetime makes a lot of sense. You ring because you're waiting in the call.

But if you don't ring, is the use case not more of a singular notification in the sense of a duration-less "call started" ping? Why would you care about the duration the banner is shown to the recipient in this case?

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

- `m.relates_to`: optional:\
  A relation (with type: `m.reference`) to the session participation event
  (`m.rtc.member`) of the notifying member.
  If available this can be used to gather session data for this notification event.
  It should always be used if the notification is related to an RTC session.
  (Eventually this event might be used to send

>   RTC session independent ringing notifications with a custom message. A bot-controlled tea timer for instance.)

Reviewer: For such a session-independent event, how would a receiving client know which slot to join when there is more than one in the room? I think this use case might need further thought and we should consider making the relation mandatory for the time being. That way receiving clients can route into the correct slot reliably.

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

The `session` information for this notification event can be obtained by the relation to the `m.rtc.member` event.

In the following we define **call** as any MatrixRTC session with the

> same `"session"` contents.

Reviewer: What is `"session"` here? It doesn't seem to be defined anywhere.

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

### Client behaviour on receiving a `m.rtc.notification` event

On retrieval, the client should not render the event in the timeline.
If the notification conditions (listed below) apply,
the client has to inform the user about the **call** with an appropriate user flow.
For `notification_type == "ring"` some kind of sound is required
(except if overwritten by another client specific setting),
for `notification_type == "notification"` a visual indication is enough.
This visual indication should be more than an unread indicator
and similar to a notification banner.
This is not enforced by the spec however and ultimately a client choice.

> The client should only inform the user if all of the following conditions apply:

Reviewer: I think this formulation is slightly misleading because most of the conditions below are in the format "when X then DON'T notify".

```suggestion
The following rules apply to the receiving client when notifying the user:
```

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

> - `m.rtc.notification` content:\

Reviewer: I have made the mentions required with ed9e4c3b01ec6c33b60c92bd37f84e666784c672.

  If the user is *not* listed in the `m.mentions` section as defined in the\
  [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#definition-mmentions),\
  the event should be ignored. (Push notifications are automatically filtered
  so this only is important for events received via a sync)

> - Local notification settings:\

Reviewer: Is silencing a room really a local setting? Wouldn't you use push rules for this as well?

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

  If the room is set to silent, the client should never play a ring sound.
  In this scenario, a `m.rtc.notification`
  event should at most be used to mark the room as unread or update the room's
  "has active **call** icon". (the exact behaviour is up to the client)
- Currently playing a ring sound (room timeline):\
  If the user already received a ring event for this **call** and is playing
  the ring sound any incoming `m.rtc.notification` for the same **call**
  should be ignored. If the user failed to pick up and a new `m.rtc.notification`
  arrives for the same room the device should ring again.
- Current user is a member of the **call** (room state):\
  None of the devices should ring if they receive a `m.rtc.notification` if the
  room's state `m.rtc.member` event of the user contains a membership for
  the **call** in the `m.rtc.notification` event.
  This includes stopping the current ring sound if the room state updates so

>   this condition is true.

Reviewer: I think this needs updating to the new sticky events design.

```suggestion
  None of the devices should ring if they receive an `m.rtc.notification` event
  if there is any connected `m.rtc.member` event in the **call** associated
  with the `m.rtc.notification` event.
  This includes stopping the current ring sound if such a membership event
  appears.
```

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

Cons

- All the ringing conditions run on the receiving user. There is no way for the
  user who starts the call to decide if it should ring the other participants.
  (Consider a very large room where I want to start a call only for the interested
  ones who want to discuss a side project. It would be very annoying if the
  initiator could not control how and who is going to be informed about that call.)
- Additionally, it is not as flexible as the proposed separate event.
  Which allows an external instance (a meeting organizer bot) to
  just ring all the users which are invited to a meeting without needing to
  participate in the call with a `m.rtc.member` event of the call.
- Push notifications would need to be sent for EVERY `m.rtc.member` state event
  update. For each joining and leaving user and for each membership update during
  a call (due to a SFU (single forwarding unit) change, changing devices
  (could even happen for screen shares if the screen share is implemented as a
  separate participating device) or MatrixRTC business logic of the call.)
  This could result in a lot of push notifications with no obvious/simple way to

>   filter them.

Reviewer: I think in encrypted rooms this is true regardless, isn't it? Push Rules need to be re-evaluated after decryption on the client and that only works if the client gets push notifications for each encrypted event.

Reviewer: Resolved with ffaad72f8a5aa3377a8f77176f498f8f296ee86d.

Active notifications SHOULD be cancelled if any of these conditions stop being valid later.

How the notification is displayed to the user is specific to both the application and the client.

If the receiving client doesn't support the referenced application type, it SHOULD use the `m.text`
fallback to visualise the notification.

### Call ringing

For notifications associated with `m.call` applications as per [MSC4196], additional properties are
introduced in the `application` content block to enable ringing and notifying recipients.

``` json5
{
  "application": {
    "type": "m.call",
    "notification_type": "ring | notification",
    "sender_ts": 1752583130365,
    "lifetime": 30000
    "m.call.intent": "audio | video | something-else",
  }
}
```

- `notification_type` required:\
  The type of notification to trigger. One of `ring`, `notification`.
- `sender_ts`:\
  The local timestamp on the sending device when the event was emitted. This is used in combination
  with `lifetime` to evaluate if the notification event is valid. To mitigate clients lying about
  the `sender_ts`, this value has to be checked against `origin_server_ts`. Receivers SHOULD use

>   `origin_server_ts` if `|sender_ts - origin_server_ts| > 20000 ms`.

Reviewer: Should we clarify why we trust the sender's local time to be more accurate than the sending server's local time?
